>> Melkey: So
kind of building off of everything.
Everything we've done so far,
we've created our backend,
we've created our database.
We have a few things running,
it's looking good.
And we have the connection, but
it's not the strongest connection.
I'm gonna introduce another really good
package, and this is called Goose.
Goose is a database migration tool.
It supports SQL migrations and
Go functions.
If anyone has ever dealt with migrations,
kind of just going at it,
that is a very unfortunate experience.
Migrations are notorious for losing data,
breaking databases,
unfortunately, just taking souls.
Because if you're not properly equipped,
whether it is not making backups,
not having the right tools, just
misaligning on your infrastructure on your
initial schemas, you can possibly run
into some really nasty consequences.
So I found this tool a while ago, and
this is recommended to me by a very,
very brilliant engineer.
It's called Goose, and
it's a migration tool specifically for Go.
And what migrations are, for
those who may be unfamiliar with
the lingo, a migration is used
when we have to make a modification
to the underlying schema structure.
So when you create a database and
you have a schema, unless it's a user and
it has a bunch of fields.
But let's say down the road, your project
blew up and a new feature came in that
your users absolutely want, that requires
you to modify that database schema.
Well, you can't just add a column,
and then what?
How do you run that?
How do you run that SQL, right?
Or if you have to add that column and
it had breaking changes and
you have to revert, what do you do?
So Goose allows us the ability to migrate
between versions of our database.
So it allows us more flexibility and
an easier way to run SQL
that does the underlying
changes to our database, okay?
Now to install Go or install Goose,
it's a bit different.
Previously, we did GoGet.
GoGet is specifically used to just bring
in a package into the scope of our
project for our go.mod and our go.sum.
In this one,
I would like you guys to install Goose.
And the reason for that is, Goose is
going to be applied to our binary,
to our Go path bin directory, because
we're going to use the Goose command.
Okay, so I'm gonna copy this
command over to the terminal.
So hopefully, it's a bit easier to see.
I'm gonna clear this.
So it's go install
github.com/pressly/goose/v3/cmd/goose@lat-
est, to get the latest
version of Goose installed.
I'm gonna go ahead and click Enter.
So I already have installed.
To make sure you have installed,
please do Goose version.
>> Melkey: Or goose -version.
>> Melkey: Is anyone getting any zsh or
script not found?
Okay, so to solve that,
is open up a terminal.
First of all, you wanna make sure
that it's installed correctly.
So you can do the following command
to check first if it's installed.
It's a grep command for Goose.
So that make sure that
exist in the go/bin.
If you have that,
that's a pretty easy fix.
All you need to do is export or
run this command,
export PATH=$HOME/go/bin to the path.
Export that into your zsh or
bash script, whatever it is.
Cool, and then did you get it to work,
the Goose, it works?
>> Student: This version.
>> Melkey: Cool,
is everyone else able
to see goose- version?
We're good, okay, sweet.
We're gonna have to write some SQL.
I know you guys want to do a Go course,
but because we're doing a backend
application SQL, you cannot get too
far from SQL in the backend already.
Eventually, you're gonna have to do it.
And we had a question earlier,
if we're going to use RMS, no,
we're gonna write this.
We're gonna write this raw, all right?
So at the root of your project,
let's go ahead and make a new folder.
Let's call this migrations, okay?
And the first file we're
gonna create is fs.go.
This fs.go file is going
to look a little wonky.
So first, let's go ahead and
declare a migrations package.
And over here, we're gonna import
the embedded library, embed.
And what we're going to do,
we're specifically reserving this file for
when we compile our application to binary.
Because what this tells us,
fs is going to be file structure.
And what we're going to tell our compiler
is that there's going to be a bunch of SQL
files that exist in this file
structure we're going to create.
And then when we use this downstream,
we actually run our Goose migration up
in our application, it's going to refer
to the file structure here, okay?
So I'll show you what I mean.
So we do this Go build command, so
it's commented out, and then go:embed.
And then here,
we're going to do wildcard.sql.
This is saying, find all of the SQL
files that are going to exist
in the directory path here.
I'm gonna create a new variable,
var FS, and it's gonna be embed.FS.
You can see it's a read-only
collection of files,
usually initialized with
a go:embed directive.
And that's it.
That's all this file is going to do.
We're going to capitalize it
because we're gonna pull in FS.
But essentially,
we're going to be building a bunch of
these files into this variable, okay?
Now comes the fun part.
In migrations, add a new file.
The syntax of this doesn't really matter.
I'm gonna share with you what I use.
I use 0000, four zeros, and 1, and
it's gonna be called _users.sql.
>> Melkey: Okay, so here,
we're gonna ship rate SQL, but first,
we're gonna actually give it some
Goose command, some Goose directive.
So we're gonna do comment,
decide to do a comment SQL file,
-- +goose Up, which says, on Up,
do the following, not that.
[LAUGH] We'll do +goose, let's say
+goose StatementBegin, okay?
And here we'll do
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS.
I'm gonna fix this extra space here.
The name of the table is gonna be users,
all right?
And here we're gonna define
what that schema looks like.
So we're gonna have a field
called id BIGSERIAL.
It's gonna act as our primary key, okay?
I'm gonna have our username,
it's gonna be a VARCHAR.
I didn't put the most effort into
thinking about the size of a username,
I just put 50.
I'm sure there's more optimal
ways of handling this, for me,
I just put 50 here, and
it's gonna be fine.
I'm gonna make sure this is UNIQUE and
NOT NULL.
Meaning, every entry in this user SQL
database is going to have to have
a username, and that username
cannot be a copy of someone else's.
We're also gonna have
another field called email.
I'll make this one a bit longer,
it's a VARCHAR(255).
Oops, okay?
We can make this unique, NOT NULL as well.
Here, we'll do password_hash.
So this one's gonna be pretty important.
We are not going to be
storing the actual hash of,
look, the actual password, right?
That's not what we're
going to be doing at all.
We're gonna be storing a hash
representation of the password.
I'll show this down the line.
We don't have to worry about
this too long, or yet.
We'll make this 255.
>> Melkey: 255, and
we'll make this NOT NULL, okay?
And then here you can just add
any field you want, right?
This could be just extra fields.
I'm gonna put bio to make this a text.
And I'm gonna create a created_at field.
It's gonna be a TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE.
>> Student: I'm gonna put
DEFAULT to CURRENT_TIMESTAMP,
which is a built-in function for Postgres.
>> Melkey: And we also have an updated_at,
which can be the same thing,
TIMESTAMP WITH TIME ZONE
DEFAULT CURRENT_TIMESTAMP.
When you do that,
make sure to end the statement.
>> Melkey: So StatementEnd for goose.
And basically what that block does is,
when we run goose Up,
this is gonna be the SQL that gets run,
depending on the version of Goose
that we're currently running at.
And with every Up command,
we just also need a goose Down command.
So do goose Down.
We'll do +goose StatementBegin.
And this is pretty easy,
we should do DROP TABLE users.
Because if you think about it, this is the
world before the users table exist, and
we wanna go back to it,
whatever that world looks like, okay?
>> Student: And
here we'll do +goose StatementEnd.
>> Melkey: Cool, now, what I'd like you
to do is just go ahead and copy this.
I'm gonna make a new file.
It's gonna be 00002, and this is gonna
be called workout, so _workouts.sql.
Go ahead and just paste this,
cuz we're gonna repeat a lot of stuff and
it doesn't make sense,
you just copy the same thing over.
So +goose Up.
Goose begins to be the same thing,
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS,
not users, but workouts.
The id still gonna be
BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY.
Now this whole project is allowing
users to create workouts.
So if you've ever worked
with relational database,
a workout has to be
tied back to that user.
Here's the thing,
I'm gonna make this not obvious.
We're gonna ignore that for now.
The reason why is cuz I wanna focus on,
first,
getting everything working with workouts.
And then we're gonna introduce the user,
and
then we can tie back into
users owning workouts.
So for right now,
we're gonna make a mental little note.
A comment, I'm gonna put user_id.
Our workout is gonna have a title,
which would be VARCHAR(255) NOT NULL.
>> Melkey: Gonna have a description,
which is going to be TEXT.
Also gonna have a duration_minutes,
which are going to be INTEGER NOT NULL.
And we're gonna have one more
field called calories_burned.
And this also gonna be an INTEGER,
and we don't care if this is null.
And then you can go ahead and
remove the username, email,
password_hash in bio fields.
So double-check that your end
result look something like this.
You should have a workouts table id,
the commented out user id, title,
description, duration_minutes,
calories_burned, and
then the created_at, and
updated_at timestamps.
>> Student: Do you wanna drop
workouts instead of users?
>> Melkey: Yeah, we're gonna workouts.
>> Melkey: Okay,
let's do that one more time.
Go ahead and go take up your file,
copy everything.
And in migration,
we're gonna make our last SQL file.
Let's go four zeros, so 00003.
And this one's gonna be
called workout_entries.sql.
>> Melkey: Just paste this here.
And I'm gonna explain the dynamic here of
what a workout entry is versus a workout.
So a workout is going to be an umbrella,
high level description of the workout.
It's gonna have the title, duration,
and things of that nature.
But a workout could have many
different workouts in it.
Someone could be doing leg day.
Could be the title, the workout.
But then they could be squatting, they
could be lunging, they could be running,
they could do calf raises.
They could do all these different things.
And each of those is going to
be an individual workout entry.
So from a schema perspective, we're gonna
have a one to many relationship here.
One workout could have many
workout entries to them, right?
And all those workout entries
are gonna have only one relationship,
back to a workout.
>> Melkey: Okay, so with that being said,
CREATE TABLE IF NOT EXISTS instead of
workout is gonna be workout_entries.
>> Melkey: Let's make some space here.
The id is still going to
be BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY.
We're gonna have a new
field called workout_id.
It's gonna be BIGINT, all right, NOT NULL.
And it's going to references, we're gonna
pass in our workouts table, like so.
And the value is going to be id.
So the workout_id here references
the id of our workout.
And we're gonna do ON DELETE CASCADE.
Meaning, if we delete the workout from
the workouts table, all of the work and
entries that are binded to it via this
relationship will also be deleted, okay?
Next field we're gonna have is
the exercise_name, should be a VARCHAR,
we'll make it 255.
Make sure this is NOT NULL.
We'll have sets.
This will be an INTEGER NOT NULL.
We'll have reps.
Make sure this is an INTEGER.
Okay, we'll have duration_seconds.
We'll make this also an INTEGER.
>> Melkey: Also have weight for
the individual workout.
We'll make this a DECIMAL VALUE.
>> Melkey: We'll add an optional field for
notes.
This could be also a TEXT.
So if anyone has PR or personal record,
or, I mean, personal best, whatever,
they can add into the notes section.
And then another field that's
gonna be crucial is order_index.
This is because if somebody has a workout
with five different workout entries, we
want these to be ordered to mimic exactly
what that user did in the workout, right?
If you submit a form
with all those entries,
we wanna adhere to that, and
not just jumble them around.
I'll make this INTEGER NOT NULL.
Then go ahead and
copy that created_at TIMESTAMP.
So at this point, your SQL table
should look similar to this so
we can ignore the +goose Down for now.
We'll save that to the end, okay?
I think this is a cool,
we're gonna add a constraint.
It's gonna add a CONSTRAINT,
whoops, CONSTRAINT on our Postgres.
I'm gonna call this valid_workout_entry.
And there's gonna be a CHECK.
And in this CHECK, we wanna make sure
that if somebody submits a workout_entry,
this could either be them lifting or
running or
doing some sort of non-lifting exercise.
So for example,
if you are going to be lifting weights,
if you're gonna be bench pressing, that's
gonna have reps, right, reps and weight.
If you're gonna be running, though, really
rep running, but you can do duration,
you can tell us how long you ran for.
So we're gonna make sure that there's
a constraint that not a workout_entry can
have both of these fields, and
every workout_entry must have
at least one of these fields.
So how that looks like is,
(reps IS NOT NULL OR
duration_seconds IS NOT NULL).
And we'll make another constraint here,
(reps IS NULL OR
duration_seconds IS NULL).